---
slug: "/blog/thesoloist"
date: "2020-12-01"
title: "Miyashita’s Poignant Tour-de-force Sweeps the Runway – Takahiromiyashita The Soloist FALL 2020 Menswear"
---
>For this assignment, I reviewed the “fall/winter 2020” collection from Takahiromiyashita Thesoloist. While I was not able to attend the show as intended, as there doesn’t exist any official recordings of the show, I was able to gather evidence from pictures of the show. 
>Over the course of drafting, I learned how important it was to provide a holistic overview of the piece I was covering. In terms of this show, that meant spending less time in-depth with certain pieces, and instead focusing on similarities between them. I also learned how important minute details are in a runway fashion show. Many designers will bring their thematic visions into every aspect of the show, including the soundtrack, makeup, and venue choice itself.
While this was not the first time, I was able to work with my passions, there was a shift in audience between this and the “compare and contrast” piece. In this piece, we were assigned with the task of writing for a general audience, as opposed to an academic audience. With this, I was able to spend more time going more in-depth into Takahiro Miyashita’s fashion output. This excellently contextualized the rest of the essay. 

---
Takahiro Miyashita’s Fall/Winter 2020 collection was another standout moment in the Japanese designer’s fashion legacy. Premiered in Paris on January 18th , 2020, this collection embodied what makes Miyashita’s work so treasured by fashion fans globally: his unique ability to express his personal experiences in his clothing.

Miyashita has perpetually turned heads over his career, making him one of the most important independent designers of modern couture.  In 1997, Miyashita debuted his breakout project “Number (N)ine”, marrying his love for American culture, music, and his signature take on “Americana”. Number (N)ine was met with universal acclaim and developed a cult following. To the shock of fashion connoisseurs globally, Miyashita announced his departure from Number (N)ine in 2009, and ostensibly disappeared from the fashion scene. Then, in 2010, Miyashita returned with his eponymous label Takahiromiyashita The Soloist.

Since 2010, Miyashita has been sending his bold visions down the runway, consistently adhering to his own sartorial vocabulary. Little has changed in that sense, but in this collection – his final collection before the 2020 pandemic - Miyashita debuted one of his most ambitious collections yet, impressing with its tone, the clothes silhouettes, and the presentation.

Miyashita has been honing his craft since his childhood. Growing up in Japan, he found himself constantly at odds with the country’s societal standards. After being expelled from school for smoking marijuana, Miyashita spent his days in Tokyo’s fashion hubs, reconstructing clothes. His experience reconstructing clothes, as well as working with the fashion legends “Nepenthes”, provided him with a deep understanding of silhouettes, something that he has carried with him throughout his career.

Miyashita’s deep understanding of clothing has propelled him to stardom alongside some of Japan’s most renowned designers. In fall 2018, Miyashita presented a collaboration show between his eponymous brand and Jun Takahashi’s Undercover.  The two designers worked in complete isolation, designing clothes under the same theme. Despite the lack of collaboration between the designers, the collection was surprisingly homogenous, and since, has been solidified in fashion history. The show was a remarkable reminder that although both designers had a firm place in the canon of runway fashion, the two were still bringing fresh ideas to the table.

Miyashita has always had a penchant for incorporating his passions and experiences into his clothing. This show was no different, with its references to classic English comedian, Charlie Chaplin and American singer Frank Sinatra. However, Miyashita’s inclusion of these icons seemed not to stem from their esteemed artistic output, but instead communicated his own personal battles with stardom and mental illness. 

Set in a grungy post-industrial runway, we can see the models donning a disappointedly blank face. The atmosphere is thick. A soundtrack – consisting of select cuts from Willie Nelson, Frank Sinatra, and Jackson C Frank – echoes ominously as models walked down the runway, all adorning a streak of makeup around their eye, typically associated with clowns. The “clown” motif underscores Miyashita’s ongoing struggle with his perception as a designer. Select pieces incorporate quotes from Chaplin, such as “MY LIFE IS COMEDY” and “I always like walking in the rain so no one can see me crying”. 

The thematic presence of loneliness and vulnerability ties together the entire collection. The collection deliberately does very little in terms of foot and bottom wear; every model was styled with the same pair of boots and shorts. The choice to include shorts in every outfit gives each outfit a feeling of vulnerability, whereas most of the outfits feature heavy layering and dense fabrics. Instead, we are forced to divert our attention to the silhouettes of the top wear, featuring extensive draping, deconstructed formalwear, and graphics.

Miyashita’s show seemed to have pleased the fashion media as well with this collection, something that Miyashita sometimes struggled with. Keith Estiler of hypebeast.com applauded the show, calling it a “[masterful] merge [of] textiles and graphic accents across a slew of technical ensembles”. Luke Leitch, of Vogue, gave the show a glowing review, stating that “This collection was a poetically recounted course of unresolved therapy as painfully “authentic” as a runway show can be.”. 

During the Coronavirus epidemic, it more important than ever to support independent designers like Miyashita. Select looks from this collection are still available on SSENSE, as well as items not featured on the runway. While certain pieces may seem to be costly, it is important to remember that many designer labels work season to season, and the costs of manufacturing clothing for these labels is much more prohibitive. This collection, as well as future collections, are an excellent introduction for those wanting to find a starting point in the Japanese designer’s fashion legacy. Miyashita’s debut brand, Number (N)ine, still makes clothing under the Number (N)ine label, however, Miyashita’s departure from the company in 2009 has left the company lacking originality. I encourage those who are interested in exploring Number (N)ine to look through archival collections and consider buying from second-hand platforms like Grailed or Vestiaire Collective.

This collection is yet another successful creative endeavor from Takahiro Miyashita. These pieces not only come from a sincere place but show a remarkable attention to detail. While the future of fashion may seem uncertain, what seems to be certain is that Miyashita continues to bring dedication and intimacy with any fashion project he gets his hands on.

Works Cited
Estiler, Keith. “TAKAHIROMIYASHITA TheSoloist. Nods to 'The Joker' in FW20 Collection.” HYPEBEAST, HYPEBEAST, 21 Jan. 2020, hypebeast.com/2020/1/takahiromiyashita-thesoloist-menswear-fall-winter-2020-paris. 
Leitch, Luke. “Takahiromiyashita The Soloist Fall 2020 Menswear Collection.” Vogue, Vogue, 19 Jan. 2020, www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/fall-2020-menswear/takahiromiyashita-the-soloist. 
Limnander, Armand. “Dressed to the (N)Ines.” The New York Times, The New York Times, 4 Sept. 2008, www.nytimes.com/2008/09/07/style/tmagazine/07nine.html. 
Rabkin, Eugene. “Fall/Winter 2020 Paris Menswear Report - Part II.” Edited by Matthew Reeves, StyleZeitgeist, 22 Jan. 2020, www.sz-mag.com/news/2020/01/fall-winter-2020-paris-menswear-report-part-ii/. 
Rabkin, Eugene, et al. “Takahiro Miyashita on Being the Soloist.” StyleZeitgeist, 10 Feb. 2020, www.sz-mag.com/news/2017/02/takahiro-miyashita-soloist/. 
Rabkin, Eugene. “How Takahiro Miyashita Built a Cult Brand Without Compromising His Creative Vision.” The Business of Fashion, The Business of Fashion, 18 Jan. 2020, www.businessoffashion.com/articles/entrepreneurship/how-takahiro-miyashita-built-a-cult-brand-without-compromising-his-creative-vision. 