---
slug: "/blog/autechre"
date: "2020-11-12"
title: "Autechre Sign Review"
---

Since the late 80s, Autechre has continuously morphed and contorted their sound. After releasing music during their early days of Ambient Techno, the duo, composed of childhood friends Rob Brown and Sean Booth, grew tired of sounding similar to their Warp Records contemporaries. Upon the release of _Tri Repetae,_ the duo had little interest in continuing their musical trajectory, telling Resident Advisor that “When we gave them Tri Rep I had half a mind that they were going to say, ‘Oh, it's not the same, we can't have this.’” Instead, Warp greenlit Autechre’s twisted electronic perspective, and brought forward a remarkably cold and complex tour de force.

Autechre’s studio output, post _Tri Repetae,_ is unabashedly genre-defying, featuring intense forays into Noise, Drone, and their signature MAX/MSP algorithmically generated sound. On projects like _Confield_ or the 8 hour _NTS Sessions 1-4_, the vast majority of the material of their work challenges the listener’s understanding of music. Drones, jaw-dropping synthesizers, and noise are all utilized to give the listener a sensory experience, typically unseen in the electronic music scene, and certainly not to their shocking degree of consistency. Tracks typically start with a musical motif that slowly becomes morphed and twisted into an unrecognizable version of itself.

_SIGN_ is a remarkable departure from Autechre’s musical vocabulary. Instead of reaching into their deep toolbox of industrial and dystopian soundscapes, the duo made the bold move to return to a more organic sound. Rather than evocative mechanical soundscapes, Autechre focuses this release on a more organic sound, while still maintaining their signature sound. The album starts with “M4 Lema,” featuring fleeting synthesizers buzzing throughout the mix. About a minute into the track, the duo introduces a gorgeous synthesizer with artifacts of synthetic drums and washes of other synths permeating the mix. At just under 9 minutes, “M4 Lema” would be considered a short track compared to some material off of the _NTS Sessions 1-4_, but the track is the longest on the album. This restraint, and artistic direction, is what makes _SIGN_ a distinguishing point in Autechre’s career.

The project does drop off at certain points. Tracks on the latter half, like “gr4” or “psin AM,” are much less engaging, and come off as wasted space on the project. The captivating synthesizers are there, but instead come across as hardly impressionable ambient techno. The album finishes off strong with the closing track, “r cazt” one of the duo’s most ethereal tracks to date.

Compared to this album’s stylistic twin, 2010’s _Oversteps, SIGN_ leaves a resounding impression of humanity in their music. With a total runtime of 65 minutes - only 5 minutes longer than their 1999 extended play _EP7 -_ the album is, shockingly, a listenable and infectious landmark of Autechre’s later work.  Tracks like “Metaz form8” serve as a gentle reminder to the listener that Autechre isn’t just some extraterrestrial machine, algorithmically destroying all of humanity. Rob and Shawn are much more omnipresent throughout this project, and gently remind us that beneath the transcendent layers of sound, there are humans at the wheel.
