---
slug: "/blog/comparecontrast"
date: "2020-11-12"
title: "Compare and Contrast - Clark"
---
> In retrospect, it is clear to me that this piece was one of my most impressive pieces in terms of prose and vocabulary. Because of the amount of research I had to do, I really got to know these movies inside and out, which made me more confident to take risks in my writing. 

> I selected this document because I feel as though it encompassed many of my improvements as a writer this semester. This was the first assignment where I had to thoroughly research for days on end to find the “right piece of evidence”. However, once I was able to find research that was “right”, I felt super confident beginning to write original analysis. Re-watching certain scenes and flipping through scripts can be tedious at first, but once you begin to notice certain patterns, future evidence gathering becomes easier to find. 

In 1939, DC Comics debuted an unlikely superhero named Batman in the 27th issue of their Detective Comics anthology (Finger). Since then, Batman has become one of the most beloved superhero franchises and has continuously shifted over time, reflecting a change in societal standards. Starting as a seminal TV series, the franchise saw its first theatrical release in 1966 with Batman: The Movie. The Batman franchise would make another theatrical release in 1989 with director Tim Burton’s Batman. Scored by Prince and Danny Elfman and featuring esteemed actors Kim Basinger, Michael Keaton, and Jack Nicholson, the film was a remarkable departure from the series’ prior tone, opting for an adaptation of the same material that took itself much less seriously. In an interview with the film’s production designer, Anton Furst, the New York Times described Gotham as “a stygian Babylon of emaciated alleys and big, bruising towers, all murk, sleaze and psychopathic architecture.” (Nightingale). The film would end up grossing 411.3 million dollars, the fifth highest grossing movie at the time (Mendelson). This remarkable box-office performance would be topped in 2008 by Christopher Nolan’s The Dark Knight, grossing over 1 billion dollars. However, while Batman (1989) received generally mixed reviews from critics like Roger Ebert, who rated it a two out of four stars, Ebert reflected the praise The Dark Knight received from critics by giving it a four out of four (Ebert). Despite some critical divergence, both entries are considered landmark pieces of popular culture and influential in their thematic content, tackling ideas such as class and gender in the context of this other universe. 

Tim Burton’s Batman communicates a clear distrust and condemnation of the American middle class, depicting them as crass and materialistic. This is abundantly clear in the parade scene, where the Joker stands on a float and appears to give away money. The public flocks to Nicholson as he mocks them with a dance, playing over a dance-pop track by Prince. A birds-eye view shot provides the viewer with a perspective of the street, making the crowd, representative of the public of Gotham city, appear as a monolithic sea of people attracted only to money. During this scene, the Joker interjects “And now folks, it’s time for who do you trust, hubba, hubba, hubba, money, money, money, who do you trust?” (Hamm). Joker’s choice to ridicule the public and cast them as materialist echoes a fundamental critique on the American middle class. 

Whereas Burton’s commentary on social class tends to side on neoliberalism, Christopher Nolan’s portrayal is much more radical. Rather than criticizing the American middle-class, The Dark Knight is much more sympathetic and instead focuses on class suppression and political corruption. Nolan articulates how they are oppressed and coerced into thinking they are protected by the government. While both films feature corruption in the legal system, much more of The Dark Knight’s conflict stems from the influence that money has on Gotham’s legal system. The Joker, who engages in corruption with the Gotham police department throughout the film, recognizes Batman as the one punitive force who abstains from this. He says “Just couldn't let me go, could you? I guess this is what happens when an unstoppable force meets an immovable object. You truly are incorruptible, aren't you?” (Nolan 131). This, ultimately, is why in the films’ conclusion, Harvey Dent is casted as a hero, despite serving as the film’s primary antagonist during the latter half. Commissioner Gordon tells Batman that Dent was the only way to restore the public’s faith in the system and says “Whatever chance Gotham had of fixing itself... whatever chance you gave us of fixing our city... dies with Harvey's reputation” (Nolan, 138). Manipulating the public’s perception is in the government’s best interest. Nolan is, therefore, articulating that a cycle of lies must be continued with more lying. 

Just like the stark contrast between Burton’s and Nolan’s depiction of class, there is a similar rift in portrayal of gender. The character of Batman (1989) adhere to a well-defined gender binary, which is made clear by Burton’s portrayal of the Joker. The Joker’s origin, which is pointed excluded from future renditions, is plainly told in Batman. He is a gangster who exudes a sense of aggressive masculine pride. Jack Nappier - the Joker’s real name - belittles the mistress of his boss Carl Grissom, Alicia. He brags to Alicia about how he plans to kill mobsters and dismisses her compliments by saying “… I didn’t ask”.  After Jack becomes the Joker, he still assumes his mob identity, which is evident through his costume. He dons a bright purple suit with padded shoulders, which is a typically masculine silhouette. During the aforementioned scene where the Joker gives away money on the parade float, he taunts Batman by saying “where is Batman? He's at home washing his tights!” (Hamm). Joker’s tongue-in-cheek remark about Batman’s uniform shows the pejorative manner in which feminine silhouettes are viewed. Similarly, the Joker catcalls Batman’s partner, Vicki Vale, by commenting on her clothes, saying that “THAT WOMAN has style!!  Jeezus Marimba!  A lovely beast like that could get a man up and running.” (Hamm).Burton seems to take a gendered approach to costumes, featuring aggressively masculine characters, with costume choices to match. 
On the other hand, The Dark Knight’s portrayal of the gender binary is much more nuanced, as evidenced by Ledger’s performance as the Joker. Ledger’s Joker is much more nuanced; his backstory only stems from monologues that tell of childhood trauma, mostly about his abusive father.  In contrast to Nicholson’s Joker, Ledger’s Joker is not afraid to dress in androgyny or ironically don the Joker’s uniform. Where Nicholson is a clean mobster, Ledger has dirt all over his clothes, subverting the established, cartoonish image of the Joker. In a pivotal scene in the movie, it is revealed that the Joker has intercepted a hospital and rigged it with explosives. In this scene, Ledger wears a female nurse’s uniform, which features a corset-like belt. Nolan’s Joker is much less willing to abide by gender norms and provides the viewer with a much more holistic overview of the Joker’s nonconforming and chaotic modus operandi, straying away from cartoonish depictions of masculinity. 

Class and gender are two thematic ideas very close to the superhero genre. Since the character of Batman stems back to the 1940s, the franchise’s evolution provides an excellent example of how long-running characters, like superheroes, reacts to changing paradigms. Whether it be the trope of the “man who saves the day” or the eccentric billionaire, one can still see the legacy of these changing standards. With Batman in particular, gender and class have been challenged in many of the series key works. Joel Schumacher, the director of one of Batman’s most notorious theatrical releases, Batman & Robin, has been credited with challenging these standards and providing the franchise with a LGBTQ+ subtext. The Batman franchise will continue to change over time. In 2021, Batman will receive another reinterpretation from Matt Reeves, and one can only ask, “How will Batman be framed in the coming years, decades, and even millennia?”.

Works Cited:
Burton, Tim, director. Batman. Warner Bros., 1989.
Ebert, Roger. “No Joke, Batman”. 16 July 2008, https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/the-dark-knight-2008.
Ebert, Roger. “Batman”. 23 June 1989, https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/batman-1989
Kane, Bob, and Bill Finger. Detective Comics, No. 27. DC Comics Inc., 1939.
Mendelson, Scott. “Tim Burton's 'Batman' At 25, And Its Wonderful, Terrible Legacy”. Forbes, 23 June 2014, https://www.forbes.com/sites/scottmendelson/2014/06/23/tim-burtons-batman-at-25-and-its-wonderful-terrible-legacy/?sh=4e93d1e346d9
Nightingale, Benedict. “Batman Prowls a Gotham Drawn From the Absurd.” New York Times, 18 June 1989. 
Nolan, Christopher, et al. The Dark Knight. Warner Bros. Entertainment, 2008.
